For the two flavours of freeviewing, we've got one that's easy to
explain and understand, but difficult to do, and another that's a bit
more complex to comprehend, but somewhat easier to do -- at least for
most people. I'll start with the one that's easier to explain.

This is called **wall-eyed stereoscopic viewing,** or parallel-view.

So what I have here is a print of a stereogram. It's the same image as
the one I showed you earlier with the viewer, just blown up a bit
because that makes things easier to demonstrate. Left-eye image on the
left, right-eye image on the right, just like with the one I put into
the stereoscope earlier. I'm going to put the image up here on my
little makeshift easel, and I'll use the two sticks here to illustrate
where I'm looking.

So, if I now just look at this print like I normally would, my
vergence and accommodation point sits right on the surface of the
print. In other words, if I were to illustrate two straight lines from
both my eyes toward the point I'm looking at, it would look like
this. And that's what my eyes do naturally.

However, that's not to say that my eyes must converge on that spot, of
course. They can converge anywhere. Right now I'm looking at the
camera lens, now I'm looking at a tree trunk over there, now I'm
looking at the ground in front of me. So what I can do here is this:
instead of looking at the surface of the print, I'm looking at an
imaginary spot **behind** the print. And if I do this just right, if
you look at it from this angle, my left eye is looking at the left
image, and my right eye is looking at the right image. And what I
actually see now is **one** image that overlaps, is made from both
these source images, and, magically, has depth.

Now you can try that with the image that's on your screen right
now. Now I don't know if you're watching this on a full size monitor,
or a laptop screen, or a big-screen TV, or your phone, so you may have
to play with the distance between your screen and eyes a bit. But the
principle is the same: you want to look **over** the top edge of your
screen, at a spot in the distance -- say, a picture on the wall --,
and then you want to try just coming down a little bit with your eyes,
and **not** change the spot that you're looking at in the process. And
then what'll happen is rather than seeing two images you'll see
*three:* a left one that's blurry, a right one that's blurry, and a
middle one, from the other two overlapping, that's sharp and that,
magically, has depth.

So, if you're watching this as a recording, now might be a good time
to pause the playback and give this a few tries, but if it doesn't
work for you don't fret!  Like I said, there's another method here
that we can use that is easier for most people -- including myself,
incidentally.

So with that let's go ahead to the other method, namely **cross-eyed
stereoscopic viewing,** or cross-view. Here's how this works.

Here is the cross-view version of the same picture. You might not
notice the difference straight away, but what's happened here is that
the two images are swapped. In other words, now it's the left-eye
image that's on the *right,* and the right-eye image that's on the
*left.*

So how do we view this? You're probably already guessing that if in a
wall-eyed image our vergence point is *behind* the print, in a
cross-eyed image it's *in front of* the print. So it looks like
this. And of course that means that my right eye is now looking at the
left half of the print, and my left eye is looking at the right
half. And the interesting bit about this is that that is **easier**
for a lot of people to voluntarily do -- and like I said, that very
much includes myself.

What you want to do now to see if cross-view works for you is this:
you look at this image and then deliberately cross your eyes (which
means you're totally overdoing it, but no matter), and then let your
eyes settle back toward normal. And chances are that the stimulus that
your brain produces when the images suddenly click into place and you
see depth is so strong that your eyes don't want to go back to where
they were.

So do try that with the image that's on your screen now, and do feel
free to pause the playback and try it a few times until you get the
hang of it. When you initially try this it may help if the image
you're looking at is rather large, relative to your total field of
vision, meaning you might want to get your face close to your laptop
screen or hold your phone up in front of your face. Once you get the
hang of it it won't matter anymore, and you'll be able to snap into
any cross-view image at will, no matter how small. But to get started
it's probably a good idea if you use a largeish image.

Now whether wall-eyed or cross-eyed images work better for you is
anyone's guess. For me, like I said, it's very much cross-eyed images
that work best, but if you're a wall-eyed person, that's totally
fine. What I'll do now is give you both versions of the image again,
for about 10 seconds each, and you can test which one works better for
you, and for those of you watching the recording you'll also be able
to switch back and forth.

Also, you may have noticed that when I show you the wall-eyed image it
comes with a red border, and the cross-eyed image has a blue
border. I'm going to stick with that convention for the remainder of
the talk. Wall-eyed red, cross-eyed blue.
