# Making stereograms

<!-- Note -->
So now that we've talked about how we *look at* stereograms so that we
get a real 3D effect, let's talk about how we can *make* them.

And, as you can imagine, there are multiple ways of doing that.


## Stereoscopic lenses

<!-- Note -->
For example, you could be using a stereoscopic lens that fits on your
camera. Now the camera system that I prefer happens to the Micro Four
Thirds system, and sure enough you can find a lens that just fits into
such a camera (only specific ones, though).


![Panasonic Lumix 12.5mm f/12 3D G Lens](images/lumix_3d_g.png)  
*Panasonic Lumix 12.5mm f/12 3D G Lens*

hypostereoscopic (10mm stereo distance) <!-- .element class="fragment" -->

<!-- Note -->
*Photo credit: Panasonic*

Now this is a discontinued product, but you can still buy it used on
your favourite second-hand photography equipment web site and you can
use it just like any other prime lens with autofocus and auto-exposure
and whatnot, and it'll create two stereoscopic images in one frame,
but you'll quickly see its big flaw: its two lenses are extremely
close together, which makes the pictures that you take heavily
**hypostereoscopic.** That's what we call images where the
**stereoscopic distance** --- the distance between the two points in
space from which the images were taken --- is much less than the
distance between your eyes.

So the distance between your pupils is approximately 70 millimeters,
and in this case the lens has a stereoscopic distance of maybe 10
millimeters. And what that means is your stereoscopic effect is a lot
less pronounced, you get a lot less depth than you'd expect. So this
sort of lens really makes sense to use only in combination with a
macro ring for stereoscopic macro photography. But it's less useful
for shooting, say, stereoscopic portraits.


![Loreo 3D Lens In A Cap 9005B](images/loreo_9005b.png)  
*Loreo 3D Lens In A Cap 9005B*

roughly isostereoscopic (90mm stereo distance) <!-- .element class="fragment" -->

<!-- Note -->
*Photo credit: Loreo Asia Ltd.*

Then, there is this device which is a manual lens --- meaning you need
to pull focus --- but which produces a much more naturally
stereoscopic image with a 90mm stereoscopic distance. That makes the
image roughly **isostereoscopic,** meaning the depth effect roughly
matches our natural stereo distance.


![Kúla Deeper lens attachment](images/kula_deeper.png)  
*Kúla Deeper*

slightly hyperstereoscopic (~105mm stereo distance) <!-- .element class="fragment" -->

<!-- Note -->
*Photo credit:  (Kúla 3D Ltd)*

Up next are mirror lens attachments. Now be warned, this is where it
gets really bulky, and what you can see here is a thing called the
Kúla Deeper, made in Iceland. If anyone's watching from Iceland, hæ
hæ!

Now the way this works is through an arrangement of several mirrors,
all at 45-degree angles to the plane of the sensor, so the path of the
light is deflected, twice, at 90-degree angles. And in a way it just
offsets the light hitting the left half of your sensor a little
further to the left, and the light hitting the right half of the
sensor a little further to the right. And what you end up with is a
slightly hyperstereoscopic image. Here the effective stereoscopic
distance varies somewhat based on the focal length of the lens that
you attach this to, and the amount of cropping you have to do in
post-production.

And now this is something I bought purely out of curiosity, to see
how it would work with my camera, and the answer is: not too
well. This product is really made for a big DSLR camera and attaches
to a 78mm thread, and is generally meant to be used with a wide-angle
lens. I'm using a stepper ring here which kind of works but for me
it's not the ideal way to take stereo pictures. But if you do shoot
with a big DSLR and want to get into stereo photography, let me know
and I'll be happy to rehome this.


## Gadget-free stereograms
Creating stereograms with any regular camera

<!-- Note -->
But! I promised you at the beginning of the talk that we'd go low-tech
here, and so I'm about to show you a stereo photography technique that
works with literally any digital camera at all. A DSLR, a
point-and-shoot, a GoPro, your phone, anything. Now this technique
won't work for action or candid shots, but your can make absolutely
stunning 3D views of buildings, parks, statues, sculptures, landscapes
and even posed portraits with this.


<!-- .slide: data-background-iframe="https://www.youtube.com/embed/eP7VyqeZv38?enablejsapi=1&modestbranding=1&rel=0&loop=1&playlist=eP7VyqeZv38" data-autoplay -->
## Gadget-free stereograms photography demo <!-- .element class="hidden" -->

<!-- Note -->
So what I want to do here is take a stereoscopic image of this little
garden ornament. And now what I'll do is this:

* I'll hold my camera up in both hands, and frame the shot with the
  ornament in the centre.
* Then I'll put all my weight on my left leg and take my first image.
* And then I shift my weight over to my right leg, centre the ornament
  again, and take my second image.

And that produces two images with a stereoscopic distance of about my
shoulder width.


<!-- .slide: data-background-iframe="https://www.youtube.com/embed/nVvdff8iFSI?enablejsapi=1&modestbranding=1&rel=0&loop=1&playlist=nVvdff8iFSI" data-autoplay data-timing="20" -->
## Gadget-free stereograms photography screencast <!-- .element class="hidden" -->

<!-- Note -->
And here’s what this looks like from my phone, using the Android Open
Camera app.

And now we've got two base images to work with; let's see how we turn
them into real stereograms.
