# Stereopsis and depth perception <!-- .element class="hidden" -->

### A note on accessibility

<!-- Note -->
I’d like to start this talk with an important note on
accessibility. Some of this talk assumes that you have functional
vision in both eyes. You will of course be able to see the images and
examples in this talk if you need corrective lenses — *I* certainly
need to wear them too — but if you happen to have very bad vision or
blindness in one eye then by the nature of this very topic you won't
be able to follow some of the examples, and I do apologize for that.

There is also a specific condition called *stereo blindness*, which
means that even though both eyes are otherwise functional, you are
unable to perceive depth. If you have that condition, this talk may
still be informative — stereoblind people have watched this talk and
subsequently told me that took away quite a bit from from it — it may
just not be as *immersive* as it might be for people with stereo
vision.

Likewise if you happen to have nystagnus or strabismus, similar
limitations might apply, and possibly also if you are using an
artificial lens implant, as is common after cataract surgery. Again, I
do apologize for that, in this case by the very nature of my topic
there's very little I can do to alleviate that. However, **even if**
you yourself cannot *see* stereoscopic images and videos, this talk
contains suggestions about how to *make* them, which you can totally
do even if you are making them for someone else.


## Stereopsis
How stereoscopic vision works

<!-- Note --> 
So, let's first get started with what stereoscopic vision --- or
**stereopsis** --- really *is* and how it works.

First of all, what we need in order to visually perceive depth is two
eyes, and more specifically two *forward-facing* eyes. One thing that
humans have in common with, say, cats, foxes, and owls, is that our
eyes sit to one side of our skull, facing forwards, and provide
fields of view that overlap to a great extent.

This of course comes at a cost, namely that our field of vision is
comparatively narrow. If I stand like this and stretch out my arms and
bring them to my side, I can only bring them out about this much
before I lose sight of my wiggling thumbs. Thus my entire field of
view comprises about a hemisphere: my peripheral vision extends to a
complete arc of only about 180 degrees. If I pull my hands further
back, I can no longer even perceive motion, meaning I don't even see
my thumbs wiggling.

Compare that to the eyes on a horse, which sit to either side of the
skull and give the animal a far greater field of vision. A horse can
see almost a 360 degree arc, leaving only a small blind spot directly
to the rear of the skull.

That is because the horse is an herbivore and other than a swift
hoof-kick to an attacker's head, its most effective self-defense
against a predator is to flee. To outrun the predator, and live to
graze another day. So the broader its field of view, the higher the
chance of detecting a predator early, even while in the vulnerable
circumstance of foraging, and thereby getting away from them as
quickly as possible.

We humans are omnivores and predators and we have evolved to sense
depth, which greatly helps us in hunting, particularly since we've
also evolved brains that enable us to make tools. If we make a spear,
or lasso, or kylie, or bow and arrow, and we have an animal to throw
or shoot it at, then it greatly helps us to be able to sense exactly
how far that animal is away from us.

So, how does that work? What, in our eyes and brains, actually makes
us sense depth?

In principle, our eyes produce completely separate inputs for our
brains to process. And the fact that the input that we get from our
eyes is usually locked and in sync really isn't innate to us: if you
look into the eyes of a small child — an infant —, you'll sometimes
see that their eyes go off in completely separate directions, which
can look quite amusing when it happens. But eventually, in our early
childhood, in fact *so* early in our childhood that none of us can
remember that we could ever *not* do it, we acquire the faculty of
**vergence.**


## Vergence
The ability to make the axes of our eyes intersect at a certain point
in space, at will

<!-- Note --> 
Vergence is our ability to align the axes of your eyeballs — an
imaginary straight line from our pupil through the centre of our
eyeball and on to perpedicularly intersect our retina. More
precisely, we're able to align them symmetrically and in such a way
that they intersect at any point in space in front of us.

You might be able to make them *not* intersect, such as when you stare
aimlessly ahead, but you'll actually need to consciously do
that. Without that effort, they'll always converge on *some* point,
though perhaps one that's far in the distance.  You won't be able to
make them *diverge*, which would be to have your eyes point *outward.*
But you will be able to make your eyes *converge* almost arbitrarily,
which you can test by stretching your arm out in front of you, holding
a finger up, looking at your fingertip, and then bringing the finger
close in while you're looking at it — most people will be able to
still look at their fingertip even when it's sitting on the tip of
their nose, even though that'll make you extremely cross-eyed and you
won't be able to keep it for long before you feel discomfort.


## Accommodation
The ability to make both our eyes focus on one point in space in front
of us, using our elastic lens

<!-- Note --> 
So vergence gives us the ability to point both our eyes at one spot in
space. And then the other thing we need for depth vision is
**accommodation,** which is our ability to stretch or relax the
elastic lens in our eye (which sits right behind our pupil) in such a
way that a specific point in space in front of our eyes produces a
sharp image on our retina, in the back of our eye. And commonly, the
accommodation point in space in front of us is also our vergence
point, meaning we point our eyeballs at a specific point in space, and
then we adjust our lens so the image of that point is also sharp.


## Binocular disparity
The small differences in optical inputs received from either eye

<!-- Note --> 
So what that means is that when we are looking at something, our eyes
produce two images, which are pretty much exactly identical in one
spot, and slightly different anywhere outside that spot. This is
called **binocular disparity.**

And through what must be an inordinate amount of trial and error in
our infancy, our brain learns to interpret these disparities between
the two optical inputs as cues about depth.

And it's by these differences that our brain essentially builds a
depth-map of our surroundings.
